[air] Introduce `RunConfig.storage_path` to replace `RunConfig.local_dir` and `SyncConfig.upload_dir` (#27)
ray-project/enhancements: reps/2023-03-20-air-storage-path.md

## Summary

We'd like to change how users of Ray AIR (specifically: Train + Tune) configure permanent storage locations.

Current way:
- Users can specify `RunConfig.local_dir` or `tune.run(local_dir)` for storage on the local node
- Users can specify `SyncConfig.upload_dir` for storage on remote nodes

Future way:
- We have a unified setting `RunConfig.storage_path` that can be set either to a local dir or a remote path.
- Setting the storage path to a cloud or NFS URI (e.g., `s3://`, or `file://` that points to a NFS mount). In these cases, data will be first written to a local cache dir on the worker, and then synced to a subdirectory in the storage path designated by `<experiment_name>/<trial_name>/`.

> - Setting the storage path to a purely local URI (e.g., `/home/foo/ray_results`). In this mode, there is no persistence once nodes die, nor is there any syncing. The user will have to figure out which node their result is stored on in order to retrieve their result manually. We would only recommend this mode for single node cluster operation generally.

Reviewer: Should we still support the "pure local URI" to work with multiple nodes? Same question as Eric below, not sure if this is going to be higher impact than we would like...

Reviewer: Actually I am reading through the PRD and I'm not seeing that we are actually intending to disable syncing to the head node. Are you seeing anything that says this differently?

Author: This was based on an offline discussion. But I generally agree, the syncing/not syncing part is orthogonal. I'll remove this from the PRD and we keep the current node-to-node syncing behavior.

```python
import ray
from ray import air, tune

results = tune.Tuner(train_fn, run_config=air.RunConfig(storage_path="s3://foo/bar")).fit()
assert results.best_checkpoint().path.startswith("s3://foo/bar")
```

### General Motivation

Users care about where their data is ultimately stored. They usually don't care about
how it got there.

However, currently they specify a local storage directory, from which data is periodically "synced"
to a remote storage location. This flow (collect locally, sync to storage) is more of an implementation
detail.

Instead, users should just specify where their data ends up - with `storage_path`.

In the long run, this concept helps us simplify the user journey and removes confusion
in the configuration.

Risk: Since we will continue to use locally cached data for the implementation,
hiding the location in e.g. an environment variable can make failures more opaque
to users.

### Should this change be within `ray` or outside?

This is an API change to Ray AIR (specifically, `air.RunConfig`, `tune.SyncConfig`, and `tune.run()`)
and therefore has to be within Ray.

## Stewardship

### Required Reviewers

> @richardliaw, @ericl

Reviewer 2: @gjoliver can you also review?

- Backwards compatibility: If a `local_dir` is passed, we set this environment variable
- In downstream components (`TrialRunner`, `Experiment`, `Trial`), we introduce respective arguments: `storage_path` and `experiment_path`

We retain full backwards compatibility with the current API.

## Usage Example

### Basic usage

```python
import ray
from ray import air, tune

results = tune.Tuner(train_fn, run_config=air.RunConfig(storage_path="s3://foo/bar")).fit()
assert results.best_checkpoint().path.startswith("s3://foo/bar")
```

### Usage when Ray storage is configured

```python
import ray
from ray import air, tune

# STORAGE_PATH is configured to s3://foo/bar

results = tune.Tuner(train_fn).fit()
assert results.best_checkpoint().path.startswith("s3://foo/bar")
```

### Accessing storage paths

```python
import ray
from ray import tune

results = tune.Tuner(train_fn).fit()

assert results.path.startswith("s3://bucket/dir/experiment_dir")

result = results.get_best_result()
assert result.path.startswith("s3://bucket/dir/experiment_dir/trial0")

checkpoint = result.checkpoint

> assert checkpoint.path.startswith("s3://bucket/dir/experiment_dir/trial0/checkpoint_0010")

Reviewer 2: Can you also add examples of what happens when a local storage path is configured? Would things still magically end up on the head node, or would that not be supported?

```

## Compatibility, Deprecation, and Migration Plan

### Compatibility

We retain full backwards compatibility with the current API.

The initial PR merges will keep the old API in the unit tests.

### Deprecation plan

We are changing stable public APIs. Thus, we will follow a deprecation plan over three releases:

For public APIs (`tune.Tuner()`, `tune.run()`):

- In Ray 2.4, we soft deprecate `RunConfig.local_dir` and `SyncConfig.upload_dir` and warn if they are used
- We keep this behavior in Ray 2.5
- In Ray 2.6 we will raise an error if those arguments are still used
- In Ray 2.7 we remove the old code paths

For developer APIs (`Trial`, `TrialRunner`, `Experiment`) we can speed up hard deprecation
by one release.

#### Syncer class

> Currently, when a `local_dir` but no `upload_dir` is specified, we synchronize trial data (e.g. checkpoints)

Reviewer 2: I think the end behavior here needs to be part of the REP.

Author: removed this section with respect to the discussion in the REP

## Summary

We'd like to change how users of Ray AIR (specifically: Train + Tune) configure permanent storage locations.

Current way:
- Users can specify `RunConfig.local_dir` or `tune.run(local_dir)` for storage on the local node
- Users can specify `SyncConfig.upload_dir` for storage on remote nodes

Future way:

> - We have a unified setting `RunConfig.storage_path` that can be set either to a local dir or a remote path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All remote storage is standardized on the built in RAY_STORAGE mechanism.
- We have a unified setting `RunConfig.storage_path` that can be used to override the default RAY_STORAGE path configured for the cluster.
```

> - Setting the storage path to a cloud or NFS URI (e.g., `s3://`, or `file://` that points to a NFS mount). In these cases, data will be first written to a local cache dir on the worker, and then synced to a subdirectory in the storage path designated by `<experiment_name>/<trial_name>/`.

Reviewer 3: not sure if users know how to differentiate and tell local disk from nfs.
we can't detect this ourselves?

Author: Currently the driver triggers a pull-based sync from the worker nodes to the head node.

Instead, we can move this to the trainable on the worker nodes in the same way that we do for cloud-based syncing today.

Then the driver can drop a marker file in the trial directory. The trainable can see if this marker exists - if so, no syncing is necessary as it's a shared directory (either the trial is running on the head node, or it's NFS). Syncing only has to be done if the file is not found.

I can add this to the REP.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, actually RAY_STORAGE guarantees the configured storage is available across the cluster already with this trick. So if you are able to obtain a filesystem from Ray storage, you can assume it's a NFS / S3 backed, or on a single node.

Reviewer 3: nice

- Setting the storage path to a purely local URI (e.g., `/home/foo/ray_results`). In this mode, trial data is synced to the head node via the object store. We would generally recommend using a remote storage path or shared directory instead.

```python
import ray
from ray import air, tune

results = tune.Tuner(train_fn, run_config=air.RunConfig(storage_path="s3://foo/bar")).fit()
assert results.best_checkpoint().path.startswith("s3://foo/bar")
```

### General Motivation

Users care about where their data is ultimately stored. They usually don't care about
how it got there.

However, currently they specify a local storage directory, from which data is periodically "synced"
to a remote storage location. This flow (collect locally, sync to storage) is more of an implementation
detail.

> Instead, users should just specify where their data ends up - with `storage_path`.

Reviewer 3: this sounds good. a quick question is what happens to the metadata and metrics that end up on the driver node today?
if users only specify an s3 path, where would they go under the new scheme.
also I assume the driver process can also upload things to specified s3 paths right? because there will be Trial level artifacts that folks need to save.

Reviewer 3: ok, cool!

In the long run, this concept helps us simplify the user journey and removes confusion
in the configuration.

Risk: Since we will continue to use locally cached data for the implementation,
hiding the location in e.g. an environment variable can make failures more opaque
to users.

### Should this change be within `ray` or outside?

This is an API change to Ray AIR (specifically, `air.RunConfig`, `tune.SyncConfig`, and `tune.run()`)
and therefore has to be within Ray.

## Stewardship

### Required Reviewers

@richardliaw, @ericl, @gjoliver

### Shepherd of the Proposal (should be a senior committer)

@richardliaw

## Design and Architecture

> - We introduce a new `storage_path` argument to `air.RunConfig` and `tune.run` as the main configuration entrypoints

Reviewer 2: This should default to RAY_STORAGE right?

- The driver saves driver-based trial data to `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`
- The driver uses a `Syncer` to periodically sync this state to the remote storage (e.g. S3), e.g. `s3://bucket/location/experiment_name`
- This _includes_ driver-based trial data, such as the config and results log
- This _excludes_ trainable-based trial data, such as checkpoints.
  Uploading checkpoints is the trainable's responsibility.
- The trainable saves trial-based data such as checkpoints to their local `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`
- The trainable uses a `Syncer` to upload these checkpoints _synchronously_ to the remote storage after saving, e.g. `s3://bucket/location/experiment_name/trial_id/checkpoint_001`

When cloud storage is disabled:

- The driver saves experiment data to `/local/path/experiment_name`
- The driver saves driver-based trial data to `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`
- The trainable saves trial-based data such as checkpoints to their local `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`
- The driver uses a `SyncerCallback` to synchronize contents form the trial directories (i.e. the missing trial-based data).
  This uses the Ray object store.

> - This also happens _synchronously_ every time a trial reports a checkpoint has been saved

Reviewer 2: What are the limitations of this mechanism? Is there some max size limit?

Author: Good point. The data must fit into the heap memory. I've added a comment.

### Future implementation

In the first step (when we just change the API), this flow can remain the same, as it fulfills
all requirements.

The implementation for the case when a remote storage location is defined will remain as is.

However, the implementation for the local storage path is currently inefficient because 
the driver synchronously blocks until trial-based data is synchronized using the `SyncerCallback`.

Instead, we should move this synchronization into the trial - analogous to the remote storage case.

Thus, when a local storage path is defined (cloud storage is disabled):

- The driver saves experiment data to `/local/path/experiment_name`
- The driver saves driver-based trial data to `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`
- The trainable saves trial-based data such as checkpoints to their local `/local/path/experiment_name/trial_id`

> - **The trainable uses the Ray object store to transfer these checkpoints _synchronously_ to the head node.**

Reviewer 2: Who receives the data here, is there a separate actor that receives the transfer?

Author: Yes! Added a comment
